Progress Report September 2021 (#298)
yuzu-emu/yuzu-emu.github.io: site/content/entry/yuzu-progress-report-sep-2021/index.md

<!--more--> 

## Yet more AMD specific changes and other graphical fixes

Certain AMD and Intel GPUs were unable to utilize yuzu's unlock FPS feature with the Vulkan API, due to the lack of driver support for the `VK_PRESENT_MODE_MAILBOX_KHR` presentation mode.
They, however, support `VK_PRESENT_MODE_IMMEDIATE_KHR`, another mode that allows Vulkan to present at a higher framerate than the screen refresh rate, so 
[epicboy](https://github.com/ameerj) made the [necessary changes](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7003) in order to unlock the FPS on these GPUs.
Due to the nature of this presentation mode, this may cause visible tearing on the screen, so bear that in mind if you try this out.

{{< imgs
	"./framerate.png| And this is with just an RX 550 (Metroid Dread)"
  >}}

Booting a title in Linux with the Vulkan API using the Intel Mesa driver resulted in a crash due to a device loss error.
The problem was in the synchronization between the rendering and subsequent presentation of frames.

Previously, yuzu would issue the Vulkan `Present` command, then wait for the frame to be rendered before continuing with the process.

> While this was fine for other drivers and vendors, ANV (Intel’s Vulkan driver) expected to have the frame already rendered before this command, which caused this error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this was fine for other drivers and vendors, ANV (Intel’s Vulkan driver) expected to have the frame already rendered before this command, causing this error.
```

Terrain textures were colourful and corrupted, like when a PC gamer dials up the RGB to 11.

This issue affected our regular suspects, GCN4 devices (Polaris, RX 400/500 series) and older, running on the Windows and Linux proprietary Vulkan drivers. 
GCN5 (Vega), RDNA1, and RDNA2 devices were unaffected.
The problem resided in how we guessed the textures were being handled by the game.

Some information first: there are several ways to handle textures, and in this particular example we need to focus on two, `Cube Maps` and `Texture Arrays`.

Cube maps are a cube with its six faces filled with different textures.
The coordinate used to fetch the data, unlike the regular X and Y values, is a single [versor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Versor) originating from the center and pointing 
to the surface of the cube.

{{< imgs
	"./array.png| "
  >}}

Texture arrays on the other hand are just as the name implies, an ordered array of textures one after the other, with X and Y used for positioning information inside the 
texture, and a Z axis used to determine which texture of the array is in use.

{{< imgs
	"./cube.png| "
  >}}

TL;DR, one is a sphere and the other is a list.

> Vulkan allows for marking textures to be converted into cube maps later if needed, but the sampling (reading) is determined by the texture type specified by the game’s shader 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vulkan allows for textures to be marked for conversion into cube maps if later needed, but the sampling (reading) is determined by the texture type specified by the game’s shader 
```

As a general rule, the fewer options available, the better.

Morph decided to [eliminate a 2 year old feature,](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7102) [boxcat](https://yuzu-emu.org/entry/yuzu-boxcat/). 

BCAT is a network service used by the Nintendo Switch to add content to its games without needing constant updates.
Our old BCAT implementation only added some “gifts” our developers placed into games that were playable at the time. It was unable to support real use cases, like the game
updates `Animal Crossing: New Horizons` regularly pushes.

While the plan is to add support for this in the future, major changes to the file system emulation need to come first.

[behunin](https://github.com/behunin) implemented much needed [clean ups to our debug configuration window.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7068)
View the results below:

{{< single-title-imgs
    "Before and After, Debug configuration settings"
    "./debugbug.png"
    "./debugfix.png"
    >}}

## General bugfixes

epicboy noticed a memory leak that would grow progressively after stopping and restarting the emulation, which was caused by yuzu’s `main_process` not being cleaned up.

> [By destroying this process when stopping emulation ](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7009), the resources are properly freed now, fixing the leak.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[By destroying this process when stopping emulation](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7009), the resources are properly freed now, fixing the leak.
```

We’ve been trying to focus on improving our homebrew support, as this isn’t just a powerful tool that only developers use. For example, modders have very powerful homebrew apps 
that the Switch community enjoys.
One important example is [UltimateModManager](https://github.com/ultimate-research/UltimateModManager), or UMM for short, which refuses to work on yuzu for now.

To counter this, [ogniK](https://github.com/ogniK5377) allowed homebrew running in yuzu to [also create subdirectories instead of just the parent directory](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6974), 
resulting in UMM managing to at least start. 
This is a temporary solution until our much needed filesystem rewrite is finished.
Additionally, [Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) pushed a [partial implementation of the `GetFileTimeStampRaw` function,](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7010) removing 
several warnings.

This isn’t enough to allow full UMM compatibility, but we’re getting there.

Moving on to a quality-of-life change, some games pop-up a confirmation window when trying to stop emulation.

{{< imgs
	"./exit.png| Like this, End emulation confirmation window"
  >}}

> This kind of redundant question is made by the game itself and while we always had a toggle to skip it, it wasn’t working properly. epicboy comes to the rescue, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This kind of redundant question is generated by the game itself and while we always had a toggle to skip it, it wasn’t working properly. epicboy comes to the rescue, 
```

Check the results below:

{{< single-title-imgs
    " "
    "./debugbug.png"
    "./debugfix.png"
    >}}

## General bugfixes

epicboy noticed a memory leak that would grew progressively after stopping and restarting the emulation, which was caused by yuzu’s `main_process` not  being cleaned up.
[By destroying this process when stopping emulation ](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7009), the resources are properly freed now, fixing the leak.

Additionally, epicboy also mitigated the crashes that happened when the emulation was stopped by 
[using std::jthread for worker threads](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7019).

`std::jthread` is a [new implementation of the thread class that was recently introduced in C++20](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/thread/jthread), which alleviates their 
management and usage, since they simplify some of the synchronization challenges inherent to multithreading.

With this change, the number of crashes caused by race conditions between working threads upon shutdown was supposed to decrease, but it also introduced a new bug that would 

> cause yuzu to hand when the emulation was stopped.

Author: Most likely a typo for hang.

Plus [Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) did a [partial implementation of the `GetFileTimeStampRaw` function,](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7010) removing 
several warnings.

This isn’t enough to allow full UMM compatibility, but we’re getting there.

Some games pop-up a confirmation window when trying to stop emulation.

{{< imgs
	"./exit.png| Like this"
  >}}

This kind of redundant question is made by the game itself and while we always had a toggle to skip it, it wasn’t working properly. epicboy comes to the rescue, 
[fixing the toggle](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6997) for good and saving us trying to stop our games some seconds of time in the process.

If you wish to change this behaviour, the option is in `Emulation > Configure… > General > Confirm exit while emulation is running`.

v1993 [moved all QtWebEngine data to a more organized centralized folder,](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7075) improving consistency and reducing clutter from the 
user’s storage.
Instead of a separate folder in `%appdata%`, information is now saved in yuzu’s directory, `%appdata%\yuzu\qtwebengine` by default.

[toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq) 

> [performed his first stubbing surgery with the audio input services `Start`, `RegisterBufferEvent`, and `AppendAudioInBufferAuto`.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7018) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[performed his first stubbing surgery with the audio input services `Start`, `RegisterBufferEvent`, and `AppendAudioInBufferAuto`](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7018).
```

splatting!

german77 [stubbed `SetTouchScreenConfiguration` and implemented `GetNotificationStorageChannelEvent`](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6992) to make `Dr Kawashima's Brain 
Training for Nintendo Switch` playable.

{{< imgs
	"./brain.png| Dr Kawashima's Brain Training for Nintendo Switch"
  >}}

He has also [stubbed `Match`](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7015) to make `Cruis'n Blast` playable. 
This game experiences some crashes, so there’s more work to do.

{{< imgs
	"./blast.png| Cruis'n Blast"
  >}}

ogniK [implemented the `EnsureTokenIdCacheAsync` function,](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/6975) making `Death Coming` go in-game, albeit with some graphical bugs that 
we have to sort out in the future.

{{< imgs
	"./death.png| Death Coming"
  >}}

Morph has been working on implementing what is needed to get `Diablo II: Resurrected` working.
Initially, the [`Read` socket service was implemented](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7082), but this mandates also implementing more complex services like `Select` and 
`EventFD`. 

> EventFD is particularly tricky as there is no native support for it on Windows, so a considerable amount of work is needed to properly emulate it in the most popular OS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`EventFD` is particularly tricky as there is no native support for it on Windows, so a considerable amount of work is needed to properly emulate it in the most popular OS.
```

> As a temporary alternative, [Read was just stubbed,](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7085), allowing the game to boot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a temporary alternative, [Read was just stubbed](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7085), allowing the game to boot.
```

{{< imgs
	"./diablo.png| Diablo II: Resurrected"
  >}}

## Future projects

> For anyone wondering about `Project A.R.T.`, the following image speaks of its own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For anyone wondering about `Project A.R.T.`, the following image speaks for itself.
```

{{< imgs
	"./art.png| Xenoblade Chronicles Definitive Edition"
  >}}

> Regarding other works, there are more rendering fixes underway, and we’re already starting plans on what to focus on after A.R.T. is finished.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regarding works in progress, there are more rendering fixes underway, and we’re already starting plans on what to focus on after `A.R.T.` is finished.
```

> That’s all folks! We thank you for your kind attention, and see you next month!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That’s all folks! Thank you for your attention and see you next month!
```
